---
permalink: /research/
title: "Research"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /md/
  - /research.html
---

Recent years have seen revolutionary progress in high throughput biology and machine learning, yet much is to be done to combine the progress in these two fields. My research focuses on the development and application of machine learning methods on large-scale biological data for more precise understanding of human disease. The methods can be used, for example, to diagnose genetic diseases, to predict cancer driver mutation, to stratify cancer patients, and to design effective vaccines. I’m passionate about drawing insights from complex biological data, developing methods to drive innovative research or having important practical applications. I’m also interested in pushing the state-of-the-art in machine learning.

## Variant Effect Prediction
Human genome encodes information about gene expression regulation, which is essential to an individual's wellbeing. However, our current understanding of genetic determinants of gene expression regulation is still limited. Consequently, we do not know the disease impact of most genetic variants, nor can we interpret most of the variants associated with diseases. A challenging task in human genetics is to precisely locate disease causing mutations among thousands of genetic variants found in any individual.

Association studies such as genome-wide association study (GWAS) had great promise to find disease associated mutations. Despite its success, such approaches suffered greatly from three limitations. First, association studies need a very large sample size to have enough statistical power, therefore they are less likely to find rare variants (Schaub et al., 2012). This limitation is even more drastic for variants with tissue or cell type specific effects, since the biopsy collected are typically a mix of tissues and cell types. Second, due to linkage disequilibrium, association studies cannot precisely locate disease-causing variants. Third, association methods do not offer biological interpretation. For GWAS study, it is unclear what molecular impact the variants may have. Many GWAS hits are located far from any known genes or in deep introns, making them even harder to interpret (Gallagher and Chen-Plotkin, 2018). Even significant splicing QTLs may not directly affect splicing, they may affect the RNA stability of certain splicing isoforms instead.

On the other hand, Large genomics data are being collected and made available for research worldwide. Large-scale data consortiums like ENCODE (Consortium and The ENCODE Project Consortium, 2004), Roadmap Epigenomics Project (Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium et al., 2015) enabled training machine learning models to predict the effect of genetic mutations (Alipanahi et al., 2015; Zhou and Troyanskaya, 2015; Kelley, Snoek and Rinn, 2016). The consortiums provide open-access systematic datasets targeted for various aspects of gene expression regulation. This includes data at transcriptional regulation level (TF binding, DNA accessibility, DNA methylation) and post-transcriptional regulation level (RNA binding, RNA structure). Models trained on these datasets are able to locate functional relevant mutations (Zhou et al., 2018). Even though no causal relationship guaranteed, such models offer the possibility to precisely locate the causal mutations regardless of linkage disequilibrium and allele frequency (Zhou et al., 2018). Furthermore, since the models are trained from targeted assays, the scores predicted by the models are predicted scores of the assay measurement, e.g. certain TF binding scores. This offers more biological insights compared to methods solely based on associations.

Other than functional assays, large-scale perturbation assays also open the possibility to train variant effect prediction models. A prominent type of perturbation assay is the massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA). MPRA can test the functional impact of millions of sequences in parallel, offering powerful resources to train functional effect prediction models (Sample et al., 2019; Rosenberg et al., 2015; Cheng, et al., 2019a). 

Similar large-scale assays are also being performed on single-cell level (Cao et al., 2020; Domcke et al., 2020). This opens even more opportunities to train models to relate genetic mutations to developmental disorders and tumorigenicity (Corces et al., 2020). 
